



RADIUS EXTensions                                         J.-F. Rieckers
Internet-Draft                                                       DFN
Intended status: Experimental                                8 June 2026
Expires: 10 December 2026


            Reject Caching and Delaying Responses in RADIUS
            draft-janfred-radext-radius-reject-cache-latest

Abstract

   In a multi-hop RADIUS proxy fabic, misbehaving clients can cause high
   server loads.  To reduce server load, this document adds a method for
   RADIUS servers to signal to proxies that they should cache a reject
   or delay the response for a certain amount of time.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-janfred-radext-radius-reject-
   cache/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the RADIUS EXTensions
   mailing list (mailto:radext@ietf.org), which is archived at
   https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/radext/.  Subscribe at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/radext/.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 10 December 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Protocol Description
     3.1.  Proxy-Capability Attribute
     3.2.  Response-Delay Attribute
     3.3.  Request-Block Attribute
       3.3.1.  Request-Block-Attribute and
               Request-Block-Extended-Attribute
     3.4.  RADIUS Instance behavior
       3.4.1.  RADIUS proxy
       3.4.2.  Enforcing Instance
   4.  Security Considerations
   5.  Recommendations for Operators
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  References
     7.1.  Normative References
     7.2.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  Document Status
     A.1.  Change History
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   The RADIUS protocol [RFC2865] does not have a means to signal a
   server overload or a congestion to RADIUS clients.  These overload
   situations may be a result of a high load of legitimate traffic and
   might even be worsened by retransmissions of packets the server
   failed to answer due to the high load.  These situation can happen in
   a lost of scenarios.  In RADIUS proxy fabric, a server overload may
   even result from a single RADIUS client, for example when an EAP
   supplicant immediately starts a new authentication try without delay
   when getting a reject.

   Especially in RADIUS proxy fabrics, the impact of misbehaving clients
   on the whole proxy chain can be reduced by reducing the packet load
   at the entry level or as early in the proxy chain as possible.  Since
   the end user device cannot be controlled, we have to rely on the
   RADIUS proxies to implement coutermeasures.

   These countermeasures can be used to reduce the load by one of two
   methods.

   First, the response to requests can be delayed.  By delaying RADIUS
   responses, the client has to wait for the answer to send its next
   request, which decreases the packet load on the server.  This method
   can also be used to slow down clients that immediately retry the
   authentication once they receive a reject.

   When a home server knows that an authentication of this client cannot
   succeed (for example because it used an expired certificate with EAP-
   TLS), and the client keeps retrying, any RADIUS actor along the proxy
   chain could generate a reject for this specific user.

   Pushing these countermeasures to the the earliest possible RADIUS
   Instance inside the proxy chain has multiple advantages over
   rejecting it at the home server.  First, it reduces the load on all
   proxies in the proxy chain, since they do not need to forward traffic
   that will get rejected anyway.  Secondly, when the response should
   get delayed, pushing this delay as far down the proxy chain prevents
   RADIUS retransmissions.  When the RADIUS proxy already has the
   response, it then does not need to proxy the retransmitted RADIUS
   packets, which reduces the load for the RADIUS proxies in the later
   proxy chain.  Instead, the RADIUS proxy just ignores the
   retransmission, since it already has an answer for this RADIUS
   packet, but the answer is just delayed.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   Additionally, we use the following terms in this document, in the
   meaning as defined here:

   RADIUS Instance  A single device or software module that implements
      the RADIUS protocol

   RADIUS Client  A RADIUS Instance that sends RADIUS requests and
      receives RADIUS responses.  This is only in reference to a single
      RADIUS hop.

   RADIUS Server  A RADIUS Instance that receives RADIUS requests and
      sends RADIUS responses.  Similar to the RADIUS Client, this is
      only in reference to a single RADIUS hop.

   RADIUS Proxy  A single device or software module that acts as RADIUS
      server and RADIUS client at the same time.  It receives RADIUS
      requests and forwards them towards the next RADIUS proxy, usually
      based on the realm of the User-Name attribute.

   RADIUS Proxy Chain  the list of RADIUS Instances that a RADIUS
      Request traverses from the first RADIUS Client across any number
      of RADIUS proxies to the final RADIUS Server that responds to the
      RADIUS Request.  When referring to the RADIUS Request, the chain
      starts from the first RADIUS client sending the RADIUS Request and
      ends at the last RADIUS Server.  For the RADIUS Response, the
      chain is reversed.  The terms "earlier" and "later" will always be
      used together with a reference to a request or a response.  As
      example: a RADIUS proxy earlier in the chain for a request is
      located later in the chain for the response.

   Enforcing Instance  The RADIUS Instance that enforces the response
      delay or the request blocking.

3.  Protocol Description

   The protocol extension consists of two parts: First, any RADIUS proxy
   in the proxy chain capable of either of the two countermeasures needs
   to signal this capability to the following RADIUS proxies and the
   home server, so they know whether or not they can use this feature.
   Second, for the reply, the home server or RADIUS proxy needs to
   signal the reply policy back to the previous RADIUS proxies.

3.1.  Proxy-Capability Attribute

   The Proxy-Capability Attribute is used to signal the capability of a
   RADIUS proxy to any RADIUS entity in the later proxy chain.  With the
   help of this, on the reply path, a RADIUS proxy can determine whether
   the requested action should be performed by itself or the packet will
   pass through another capable proxy later which can then perform the
   actions.

   The Proxy-Capability Attribute is of type string as defined in
   [RFC8044], Section 3.5.  The value of the Proxy-Capability Attribute
   is a concatenated list of the proxy capabilities the RADIUS Instance
   has.

   Correct formal description: TODO

   Informal description: concatenate all capabilities. values up to 127
   are encoded in one byte, extended capabilities are encoded as two
   bytes.  For parsing, the receiver can look at the first bit, if it is
   a 0 it is a single-byte value, if it is a 1, then the capability is a
   two-byte value.  This allows for simple extension, while keeping it
   as simple and short as possible.  The attribute MUST NOT include a
   capability multiple times.

   Each capable RADIUS Instance in the RADIUS Proxy Chain SHOULD add the
   Proxy-Capability Attribute for Access-Request and Accounting-Request
   packets before forwarding the RADIUS packet to the next RADIUS
   instance.  Future capabilityes MAY specify capabilities for other
   RADIUS packet types.  The capabilities defined in this document
   SHOULD only be added for Access-Request and Accounting-Request
   packets when Proxy-Capabilitiy is used with other RADIUS packets.

   When a capable RADIUS proxy receives a RADIUS packet with the Proxy-
   Capability Attribute, the RADIUS Proxy SHOULD add its own
   capabilities to the Attribute if the capability is not yet included.
   The RADIUS Proxy MUST NOT remove existing capabilities, unless
   explicitly configured to remove them.  As a hint, administrators
   SHOULD only configure the removal of capabilities when they know that
   the capability is not honored.

   In this document, we define two capabilities:

   Capability Response-Delay-Capable  The Capability Response-Delay-
      Capable with value 1 is used to signal that the RADIUS Instance is
      capable of delaying RADIUS Response packets.

   Capability Request-Block-Capable  The capability Request-Block-
      Capable with value 2 is used to signal that the RADIUS Instance is
      capable of blocking RADIUS Requests that match specific criteria
      and sending an Access-Reject instead on behalf of the home server.

3.2.  Response-Delay Attribute

   The Response-Delay Attribute is used to signal the desire of the home
   server that sending of the RADIUS response should be delayed for a
   certain amount.  The Response-Delay Attribute is of type integer as
   defined in [RFC8044], Section 3.1.  The value is the delay in
   milliseconds.

3.3.  Request-Block Attribute

   The Request-Block Attribute is used to signal the desire of the home
   server that future requests that match certain criteria should be
   rejected by a RADIUS Instance on behalf of the home server.  The
   Request-Block Attribute is of type tlv as defined in [RFC8044],
   Section 3.13.  The sub-attributes are defined as follows:

   Request-Block-Period  This sub-attribute contains the time span in
      seconds during which requests matching the description should be
      rejected.  The attribute is of type integer as defined in
      [RFC8044], Section 3.1.

   Request-Block-Attributes  This sub-attribute contains a list of
      attribute types that should be used to match authentication
      requests of the same user.  The attribute is of type string as
      defined in [RFC8044], Section 3.5 and contains a concatenated list
      of one byte attribute types.

   Request-Block-Extended-Attribute  This sub-attribute contains a
      reference to a single extended attribute that should be included
      in the match.  The attribute is of type string as defined in
      [RFC8044], Section 3.5.

3.3.1.  Request-Block-Attribute and Request-Block-Extended-Attribute

   RADIUS attributes are formatted as Type-Length-Value with a fixed
   one-byte type field.  Since this allows for only 256 attributes,
   extended attributes have been defined in [RFC6929].  Additionally,
   RADIUS has vendor-specific attributes ([RFC2865], Section 5.26 or
   [RFC6929], Section 2.4, the header of which may not be known to all
   implementations.  To still allow to filter on individual extended or
   vendor-specific attributes which might be unknown to the Enforcing
   Instance, we need a means to reference these attributes.

   The Request-Block-Attributes sub-attribute is used to reference the
   "primitive" RADIUS attributes, that is RADIUS attributes that only
   have the one-byte attribute type.  Since every of these types have a
   one-byte-length, we can reduce the overhead by concatenating the
   attribute types, as they are all one byte.

   For the extended or vendor-specific attributes this is not as easy,
   since the length of the header may vary between the different
   attributes.  Therefore, we have the Request-Block-Extended-Attribute
   sub-attribute, which references a single attribute that should be
   included in the blocklist.  This sub-attribute can be included
   multiple times in the Request-Block attribute.

3.4.  RADIUS Instance behavior

   TODO - mostly stub or not complete specification, general description
   of the behavior for every involved party

3.4.1.  RADIUS proxy

   Any RADIUS Instance capable of delaying or blocking SHOULD add the
   Proxy-Capability attribute to every RADIUS Access-Request they send
   to a RADIUS server.  If a RADIUS Instance receives a RADIUS request
   with this attribute, it SHOULD add its own capability, if not present
   already, to the proxied RADIUS packet and SHOULD NOT remove any other
   capability.

   Upon reception a RADIUS Proxy needs to decide if it is the Enforcing
   Instance or not, by looking at the original request.  This decision
   has to be done individually for the Response-Delay and the Request-
   Block policy.

   If the received RADIUS response contains a Response-Delay attribute
   and the original request contained the Response-Delay capability, the
   RADIUS Proxy SHOULD NOT enforce the policy and instead forward the
   RADIUS response to the RADIUS client.  If the original request did
   not contain the Response-Delay capability, the RADIUS Proxy MUST
   become the Enforcing Instance for the Response-Delay.

   The algorithm for the Request-Block functionality is basically
   similar, but needs additional considerations in regards to present
   attributes.  If the received RADIUS response contains a Request-Block
   attribute and the original request did not contain the Request-Block
   capability, the RADIUS Proxy MUST become the Enforcing Instance for
   the Request-Block.  Otherwise, the RADIUS Proxy MUST check the
   presence of all attributes referenced in the Request-Block, whether
   or not they are present in the original RADIUS request.  If an
   attribute was not present in the RADIUS request, the RADIUS Proxy
   MUST check if the missing attribute was added by the RADIUS Proxy and
   it is present in RADIUS request the RADIUS proxy sent to the next hop
   RADIUS server.  In this case the RADIUS Proxy MUST become the
   Enforcing Instance, since any RADIUS Instances after the current
   RADIUS Instance cannot enforce the requested blocking, as at least
   one of the attributes is missing.  If the missing attribute was not
   added by the RADIUS Proxy, the RADIUS Proxy SHOULD remove the
   Request-Block attribute before forwarding the packet to the next
   RADIUS Client.  In this case, the missing attribute was added by a
   RADIUS Instance not capable of Response-Block and positioned between
   the current and a later Response-Block capable RADIUS Instance in the
   RADIUS Proxy Chain of the RADIUS Request.  Since we have no RADIUS-
   native method to signal this condition back, the best approach to
   deal with this is to ignore the block request.  By removing the
   Request-Block attribute from the response, we reduce the load on
   later RADIUS Instances on the RAIDUS Proxy Chain for the RADIUS
   Response, since they do not need to perform the attribute checks.
   This removes the Response-Block functionality completely without
   signalling back to the capable RADIUS Instances earlier in the
   Response Proxy Chain.  There is no easy solution to this problem, but
   this is considered the best solution compared to complicated
   signalling mechanisms that would only be beneficial in a limited
   number of use cases and increase the complexity of implementations.
   We therefore rely on the RADIUS server not to request a block based
   on attributes that may have been added during the proxy chain.  See
   Section 5 for further discussion.

3.4.2.  Enforcing Instance

   An Enforcing Instance is in charge of performing the requested
   action.

   In general, an Enforcing Instance MUST remove the corresponding
   RADIUS Attribute with the request to delay or block from the RADIUS
   response before forwarding it to the next RADIUS Client.

3.4.2.1.  Response-Delay

   An Enforcing Instance for the Response-Delay MUST delay the response
   it received from the RADIUS server before forwarding the RADIUS
   response to the next RADIUS Client.  If the Enforcing Instance is not
   a RADIUS Proxy, any action that would normally follow the reception
   of the RADIUS response MUST be delayed, i.e. the Enforcing Instance
   acts as if the RADIUS response has not been received until the delay
   timespan has passed.

   An Enforcing Instance MUST NOT retransmit the RADIUS Request again to
   the next hop RADIUS Server if it already received a RADIUS response
   with the Response-Delay attribute.  If the Enforcing Instance is a
   RADIUS Proxy and the RADIUS Client retransmits the RADIUS request,
   the Enforcing Instance MUST silently discard the retransmission.
   This only applies for Enforcing Instances, any other RADIUS Proxy
   will still follow its normal retransmission policy.

   The Enforcing Instance SHOULD delay the RADIUS response according to
   the time span in the Response-Delay attributes, however the Enforcing
   Instance MAY have an upper limit for the delaying response timespan.
   By default, this upper limit SHOULD not be less than 10000
   milliseconds (10 seconds) and it SHOULD be configurable by the
   administrator.


   // TODO: Reasoning behind the 10 sec delay: A common timeout limit
   // for "response is missing, stop retrying" is 30 seconds, so by
   // keeping the default upper limit below this we ensure that the
   // response gets to the client, but it is delayed.  We want to have
   // the time configurable, because delaying responses uses up
   // resources on the server.  I delibirately didn't include text that
   // the response should be sent if the ID space is exhausted, because
   // the ID exhaustion may be the reason for the response delay further
   // down the proxy chain, so in order to prevent impact on the later
   // proxy chain, we need to shift the problem as far to the beginning
   // of the proxy chain as possible.
   //
   // -- Janfred


   // TODO: Maybe we should define a lower limit for the upper-limit
   // config, i.e. the upper limit must not be less than 500
   // milliseconds.
   //
   // -- Janfred

3.4.2.2.  Request-Block

   An Enforcing Instance for the Request-Block MUST reject the RADIUS
   requests with certain attributes.

   In order to avoid servers from blocking legitimate traffic by setting
   the block-filter to arbitrary values, the Request-Block is always
   dependent on the attributes of the original RADIUS requests.

   TODO: From here only stub.

   General algorithm: * create a list of attributes * attributes that
   appear multiple times in the request must be included multiple times
   in the list as well * for extended attributes: add every attribute to
   the list with the prefix in the request-block-extended-attribute (but
   skip over the length byte in the attribute in the request) * When a
   request is received with attributes matching the list (every
   attributes must be present and match): send an Access-Reject with an
   Error-Cause attribute set to value TBD4 (Request ratelimited)

   The considerations for upper limit should probably also apply,
   similar to the response-delay, but with way higher defaults

   Maybe add functionality that the block is automatically timed out
   after a time when no login has be observed (to free up space), but
   "reset" the counter if observed again.

4.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

5.  Recommendations for Operators

   TODO.

   Elements to consider: * When should be delayed?  * nearing ID-
   Exhaustion due to many ongoing EAP sessions, add small delays * on
   high server load add small delay * add a delay for a reject.
   (FreeRADIUS has the option already, let's push this to the edge
   instead) * When should the home server request a block for how long?
   * outer username in EAP wrong - probably hours * inner username in
   EAP does not exist (and has several failed attempts shortly) - few
   minutes (outer username may stay the same if user changes only inner
   username) * username points to someone that is no longer eligible for
   access - probably hours * When should a proxy request a block?  *
   repeated requests immediately after a reject with impact on the
   network - seconds to minutes * realm in username is unroutable -
   minutes to hours * What are good and bad choices for attributes?  *
   good * User-Name.  Always.  * Calling-Station-ID * Called-Station-ID
   (i.e. only block phone on this specific access point) * NAS-
   Identifier, NAS-IPAddr, NAS-IPv6Addr (only block from this specific
   NAS, helpful in roaming scenarios) * Operator-Name * bad * Proxy-
   State (added by proxies that might not understand it.  MUST NOT be
   used) * Any other proxy-specific attribute * Only User-Name (may be
   too broad in case of anonymous identities)

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document will have IANA actions.

   They are still TODO in detail.

   Roughly the following things should be allocated:

   *  Attribute Type (possibly from extended attributes) for Proxy-
      Capability of type string (Extended-Attribute-1, TBD1)

   *  New registry table for for types in the Proxy-Capability attribute

      -  0 - reserved

      -  1 - Response-Delay-Capable

      -  2 - Request-Block-Capable

      -  3-125 - reserved for future use

      -  126 , 127 - experimental

      -  128 - 255 - Extended Capability

   *  Attribute Type for Response-Delay of type integer (Extended-
      Attribute-1, TBD2)

   *  Attribute Type for Request-Block of type tlv (Extended-Attribute-
      1, TBD3)

   *  New registry table for types in the Response-Delay attributes

      -  0 - reserved

      -  1 - Request-Block-Period, Type integer, request to stop sending
         data for this particular user for period of time, time in
         seconds

      -  2 - Request-Block-Attributes, type string

      -  3 - Request-Block-Extended-Attribute, type string

      -  4-250 - reserved for future use

      -  251 - private use

      -  252-255 - experimental

   *  New entry in the registry for Values for RADIUS Attribute 101,
      Error-Cause Attribute

      -  4XX (TBD4) with description "Request ratelimited"

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC2865]  Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A., and W. Simpson,
              "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)",
              RFC 2865, DOI 10.17487/RFC2865, June 2000,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2865>.

   [RFC8044]  DeKok, A., "Data Types in RADIUS", RFC 8044,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8044, January 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8044>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC6929]  DeKok, A. and A. Lior, "Remote Authentication Dial In User
              Service (RADIUS) Protocol Extensions", RFC 6929,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6929, April 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6929>.

Appendix A.  Document Status

   Note to RFC Editor: Remove this section before publication

A.1.  Change History

   draft-janfred-radext-radius-reject-cache-00:

      -  Renaming of the draft, since this does not do congestion
         control.

         o  Introduce signalling in Status-Server for response-delay

   draft-janfred-radext-radius-congestion-control-01:

      -  no significant changes

   draft-janfred-radext-radius-congestion-control-00:

      -  Initial draft version

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Author's Address

   Jan-Frederik Rieckers
   Deutsches Forschungsnetz | German National Research and Education Network
   Alexanderplatz 1
   10178 Berlin
   Germany
   Email: rieckers@dfn.de
   URI:   www.dfn.de
